This is Concord, flying over Africa on a
flight like no other. The sun, which was
directly above Concord, just went
completely dark in what was to become
the most unique solar eclipse ever
witnessed. In 1973, scientists were able
to cheat and experience 74 minutes in
the moon's shadow by flying in the only
vehicle capable of chasing an eclipse.
In order to stay in the moon's shadow
for as long as possible, Concord had to
follow a very precise flight plan. The
best chance for achieving this was over
Africa, but this didn't give the team a
whole lot of options for airports. Most
of the runways in Africa were too short
for Concord, and the hot conditions
meant that Concord would have to carry
less fuel during takeoff. They
eventually settled on the island of Gran
Canaria, which had a cooler climate and
a great runway. The plan was to take
off, fly south, and intercept the moon's
shadow at a specific point over
Mauritania, where it would turn and
follow the shadow across the Sahara
Desert. But the path of the shadow
wasn't straight and instead followed a
large curve. This would make science
observations from inside Concord very
difficult if it had to constantly make
turns. And so Pierre and his team came
up with a straight-line path that would
touch the northern edge of the shadow,
cut across to its southern edge, and end
at its northern edge. This would give
them up to 80 minutes in the shadow
without having to make a single turn.
Since the shadow would be traveling a
little bit faster than Concord, it would
eventually outrun it. And so the team
had to meet the shadow at a precise
point on the shadow's leading edge. If
they were to arrive more than 15 seconds
late or a kilometer off, they would fall
out of the shadow much sooner, and their
time in totality would be drastically
reduced. But arriving at the intercept
point so precisely, with all the
variables of weather, would be a huge
challenge.